# README for DATA 512 A2 Project

## Introduction
The goal of this project is to explore potential bias in Wikipedia articles of politicians by country. We're interested in finding out whether a country's population size has any relationship with the quality and coverage of its politicians' articles. 

To understand the results of the analysis, it's important to know how we define a "quality" article. Wikipedia articles have 6 different levels of quality:
* FA - Featured article
* GA - Good article
* B - B-class article
* C - C-class article
* Start - Start-class article
* Stub - Stub-class article

For our purposes we're considering "FA" and "GA" articles to be high quality. Given that definition, these are the metrics that we'll compare to country population:

* __Coverage__: High quality articles per population = (Number of FA or GA articles) / (Population)
* __Relative__ __Quality__: Proportion of high quality articles = (Number of FA or GA articles) / (Number of total articles)

## Source data descriptions
We use 3 datasets from external sources in this analysis:

**Wikipedia politician articles**: Wikipedia data on politicians by country is published on Figshare. 
* Data and documentation is available [here](https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/Untitled_Item/5513449)

**Country populations**: Data on world populations is published by the Population Reference Bureau. 
* Data is available [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1CFJO2zna2No5KqNm9rPK5PCACoXKzb-nycJFhV689Iw/edit#gid=283125346)
* Documentation and more information about the Population Reference Bureau is available [here](https://www.prb.org/international/indicator/population/table/)

**Article quality predictions**: Quality predictions for Wikipedia articles are generated by machine learning and can be pulled from the ORES REST API. See below for API documentation
* API documentation is available [here](https://ores.wikimedia.org/v3/#!/scoring/get_v3_scores_context_revid_model)

## Description of files in this repository
* __LICENSE__: MIT license for this project
* __WPDS_2020_data-WPDS_2020_data__: Data on country populations from the Population Reference Bureau (see section above on data sources)
* __article_quality_ratings.json__: Data pulled from the ORES API on Wikipedia article quality (see section above on data sources). This dataset is created by hcds-a2-bias.ipynb, see that notebook for details
* __hcds-a2-bias.ipynb__: Jupyter notebook that uses the source data mentioned above analyze the coverage and relative quality of politician articles by country
* __page_data.csv__: Data from Figshare on politician articles in Wikipedia (see section above on data sources)
* __wp_wpds-no_quality_prediction.csv__: Data recording which politician articles didn't have quality ratings available in the ORES API. This dataset is created by hcds-a2-bias.ipynb, see that notebook for details
* __wp_wpds_countries-no_match.csv__: Data recording which politician articles didn't have matches in the country data, and vice versa. This dataset is created by hcds-a2-bias.ipynb, see that notebook for details
* __wp_wpds_politicians_by_country.csv__: Merged dataset of politician articles, country populations, and article quality ratings. See below for a dictionary of the fields in this data

## Reproducing this analysis using hcds-a2-bias.ipynb
This repository contains everything needed to reproduce this analysis. Using the source data listed above (which is also included in the repo), the juputer notebook hcds-a2-bias.ipynb will produce a combined dataset (described below) and 6 tables comparing the top and bottom ranked countries and regions by article coverage and relative quality.

## Column descriptions and provenance for wp_wpds_politicians_by_country.csv
* __country__: Country of the politician in the article, common to both the Wikipedia and World Population data
* __article_name__: Name of the politician the article is written about, from the Wikipedia data
* __revision_id__: The unique ID for the Wikipedia article, common to both the Wikipedia and ORES API data
* __article_quality_est.__: The quality estimate for the article pulled from the ORES API
* __population__: Population size for the country from the World Population data

## Writeup
Before starting this analysis, I expected to see some bias in Wikipedia article quality across different countries. Specifically, I thought that smaller countries would probably have lower coverage and a lower proportion of high-quality articles. My hypothesis was that smaller countries would have fewer editors participating in creation of high-quality articles, and that there would be less information about those countries available in general.

What I found was kind of surprising: the biases were different for high coverage vs. high relative quality. High coverage was biased toward countries with small populations, while high relative quality seemed biased toward larger or mid-size countries. Romania and Dominica were the only countries appearing in both top 10 lists. The bottom 10 countries by coverage and relative quality all had 0 high quality articles, and spanned a highly variable range of population sizes.

This tells me that when using English Wikipedia as a data source, small countries can have a surprisingly high number of high-quality articles relative to their population size. However, small countries may also have a higher proporiton of low-quality articles compared to the number of high-quality articles. So when researching smaller countries, even though it may seem like there's a surprising breadth of information available, it may be important to be skeptical of the quality of that information.